VISTA: Verification using Intelligent Systems for
Test Automation
Asad Ali, Sheikh Abbas, Mian Arqam.∗, Dr. Fahad Bin Muslim†
∗Department of Computer Engineering, Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering science and Technology, Topi, Pakistan
Email: asadnaeem4817@example.com
†Department of Computer Engineering, Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering science and Technology, Topi, Pakistan
Email: supervisor@example.com
Abstract—Formal verification is a critical part of RTL designs,
however writing assertions manually is time taking, error prone
and requires domain expertise. To address this problem, we
present a novel approach VISTA (Verification Intelligent System
for Test Assertion generation), an AI-driven framework that
generates SystemVerilog Assertions (SVA) directly from RTL
code. VISTA is built on a fine-tuned Llama 3.1 (8B) model,
trained using QLoRA based Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFTs) technique on a dataset of 20,000 RTL and SVA pairs
snippets with their clock and synchronization information. A
challenge that we face is during formal verification using tools
like SymbiYosys for benchmarking cannot directly take block
snippets; for this, we introduce a standardized RTL wrapping
template. This template transforms conditional RTL fragments
into complete, synthesizable module level descriptions by in-
corporating clocking semantics and signal definitions, making
them directly usable with tools such as SymbiYosys. A dedi-
cated post-processing module is developed that extracts clean
assertion structures from model output, filtering extra text, and
normalizing results according to tool compatible formats. To-
gether with a structured benchmarking framework that enables
consistent evaluation across different RTL designs, VISTA forms
an end-to-end pipeline from raw RTL to verified assertions.
Experimental results show that VISTA achieves (benchmarking
reult add later)) validation accuracy with fast inference times,
reducing the manual effort traditionally associated with assertion
based verification. This work demonstrates that large language
models, when integrated with formal verification methodology,
can advance automation, reliability, and scalability in modern
hardware verification workflows.
Index Terms—Hardware Verification, SystemVerilog Asser-
tions, Large Language Models, RTL-to-SVA Generation, Formal
Verification, RTL Wrapping Template, Benchmarking Frame-
work, QLoRA Fine-Tuning
I. INTRODUCTION
The process of verifying hardware designs at the register-
transfer level is one of the most time-consuming parts of
creating modern VLSI designs. This usually takes up a part
of the overall effort to develop complex System-on-Chip
designs. SystemVerilog Assertions play a role in this process
by letting designers formally specify and verify how their
designs behave.. Writing these assertions by hand requires a
lot of expertise and does not work well when designs get
more complex which can lead to mistakes and incomplete
verification. Previous ways of generating assertions relied on
natural language specifications or analyzing the RTL code.
However these methods have some limitations. For example
using language can be ambiguous and lead to incomplete docu-
mentation while static approaches often fail to capture complex
behaviors that happen over time. Even though Large Language
Models have shown results in generating code using them
to directly generate SVA from RTL code without relying on
external specifications is still a relatively new area. In this work
we introduce VISTA, which’s an AI-driven framework that
generates SystemVerilog Assertions directly from RTL code.
Our system is built on a tuned model using a large dataset of
RTL and SVA pairs. Since the RTL fragments we use do not
represent designs we created a novel template that converts
them into complete modules that are ready for verification.
We also added a -processing stage to make sure the generated
assertions are compatible with formal verification tools. Our
framework includes a way to consistently evaluate the gen-
erated assertions. Our results show that VISTA significantly
reduces the effort required while maintaining accuracy across
multiple designs, which highlights its potential as a scalable
solution, for modern hardware verification workflows.
II. RELATED WORK
Traditional methods like GoldMine and HARM use data
flow analysis and simulation to find properties from RTL de-
signs. These methods are good for making assertions but they
mainly focus on how parts of a design work together and have
trouble with complex sequences and time relationships. Also
they make a lot of weak assertions that need to be manually
checked before they can be used for verification. Some newer
work uses Large Language Models to improve automation
in making assertions. Spec2Assertion uses natural language
specifications to make SVAs by breaking them down into cause
and effect structures. It works well for protocols. AssertLLM
improves this by adding waveform traces to the specifications
making the assertions better. AssertionForge uses knowledge
graphs to match the design intent with the RTL implemen-
tation fixing inconsistencies between specifications and actual
hardware behavior. Despite these improvements most methods
that use Large Language Models still need specifications,
which are often incomplete or not available in real-world
development. The AssertionBench benchmark provides a way
to evaluate methods that use Large Language Models to make
assertions. It uses formally verified Verilog modules with
reference assertions. Studies that use this benchmark show
that models that are fine-tuned for domains like LLaMA
3.1 variants can work better than general-purpose models
for hardware verification tasks. Formal verification tools like
SymbiYosys are also important for checking the correctness
of generated assertions. A related work to our approach is
VERT, which provides a dataset of RTL-SVA pairs for training
machine learning models. VERT focuses on making assertions
from RTL constructs. However the dataset is mostly RTL
fragments rather than complete module-level designs, which
limits its use for formal verification tools that need fully
structured RTL. Our method, VISTA builds on work and ex-
tends it by directly making assertions from RTL code without
using natural language specifications. It also introduces a RTL
wrapping template that turns conditional RTL fragments into
complete verification-ready modules. Additionally it has a -
processing stage to normalize generated assertions. With a
benchmarking framework using SymbiYosys VISTA provides
a complete solution that addresses key limitations of existing
approaches. VISTA makes assertions from RTL code. Uses
the RTL wrapping template to make complete modules. This
way VISTA can work with verification tools that need fully
structured RTL, like SymbiYosys.
III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
VISTA uses a step-by-step approach to turn RTL code into
verified SystemVerilog Assertions (SVAs). The first step is to
give the RTL code to a LLaMA 3.1 model that has been trained
on many RTL and SVA examples. This model understands
how the design works. Can create matching assertions without
needing extra information. Next both the created assertions and
the original RTL code are prepared for checking. To do this a
standard template is used to wrap the RTL code into a design
that formal tools like SymbiYosys can work with. The template
adds parts like signal declarations, clocking and execution
context. At the time the created assertions are refined by
removing extra text and making sure they follow SystemVer-
ilog rules. The wrapped RTL code and cleaned assertions
are then combined into one verification setup. This setup
is given to SymbiYosys, which checks the assertions using
engines. The whole process is shown in Fig. 1. SymbiYosys
is used because it is source, flexible and easy to integrate.
This allows for accessible testing. A consistent benchmarking
setup is also used to compare performance across RTL designs.
In the end this approach enables automated RTL-to-assertion
generation, transformation and formal validation. This reduces
work and makes verification more efficient. The RTL code
and SystemVerilog Assertions are key, to this process. The
RTL code is used to create the assertions. The assertions are
verified using the RTL code. The process is designed to work
with RTL designs.
IV. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The VISTA system is made to generate and check Sys-
temVerilog Assertions from RTL code.
It has a web interface where users can put in their RTL
designs and see the results.
Fig. 1. VISTA pipeline architecture illustrating RTL input, LLM-based
assertion generation, template formatting, and formal verification using Sym-
biYosys.
The backend sends the RTL code to a model called LLaMA
3.1 which makes the corresponding assertions.
You can see the system in Fig. 2.
The VISTA system takes the made assertions and the RTL
code. Processes them with a special template and a step to
make sure they are structured right and work with formal
verification tools.
The VISTA system uses SymbiYosys to check the design,
which looks at the model to see if the assertions are correct.
Then it sends the results back to the user through the web
interface.
When we put the VISTA system on computers we use
something called Docker containers so it works the same
everywhere.
The VISTA system can handle RTL code that’s up to 5,000
lines long and it does not take too long usually less than 25
seconds even on regular computers, with GPUs.
V. DATASET AND TRAINING
A comprehensive dataset of 19,000 RTL-SVA pairs was cu-
rated from multiple sources including OpenCores IP modules,
RISC-V processor cores, and synthetic assertion generators.
Each training sample comprises: RTL snippet (50–500 lines),
corresponding golden SVAs (1–15 assertions), clock domain
Fig. 2. engine.
VISTA system architecture showing the interaction between user interface, backend server, LLM module, processing unit, and formal verification
specification, reset polarity metadata, and functional coverage
annotations.
LLaMA 3.1 8B underwent supervised fine-tuning using
QLoRA with rank 16, α = 16, employing 4-bit quantization
and Unsloth optimizations reducing VRAM footprint to 6GB.
Training configuration utilized batch size 4, learning rate
4 × 10−5, across 3 epochs on NVIDIA A100 achieving final
perplexity of 1.87. Dataset splits maintained 80/10/10 ratios
for training/validation/testing respectively.
Prompt templates followed the structure: “Given RTL mod-
ule with clock [clk] and reset [rst], generate comprehensive
SystemVerilog Assertions covering safety, liveness, and in-
terface properties.” Few-shot examples from high-coverage
modules augmented context windows up to 8k tokens.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The VISTA framework is made up of a pipeline. This
pipeline combines RTL processing and AI-based assertion
generation with verification.
The frontend is a web-based interface where users can
submit their RTL designs.
The backend handles the request processing. Sends the RTL
code to the LLaMA 3.1 model for processing.
The VISTA framework uses a tuned LLaMA 3.1 model
to generate SystemVerilog Assertions directly from the RTL
input.
The LLaMA 3.1 model uses structured prompting to gen-
erate these assertions.
The prompt template includes the RTL code and some
assumptions about the clocking and reset.
This allows the LLaMA 3.1 model to generate assertions
that cover safety and functional correctness properties.
The generated output is then cleaned up to remove any text
and to make sure it is syntactically correct.
The VISTA framework generates RTL fragments that’re not
directly compatible with formal verification tools.
So the VISTA framework applies a wrapping template to
make them compatible.
This wrapping template adds module definitions, signal
declarations, clock generation logic and reset handling to the
RTL fragments.
The VISTA framework generates assertions like the one
shown below:
property p_fifo_full;
@(posedge clk) disable iff (rst)
(wr_en && !rd_en && !full) |-> ##1 full;
endproperty
assert property (p_fifo_full);
The VISTA framework then sends the final design to
SymbiYosys for formal verification.
The SymbiYosys tool performs model checking using en-
gines and produces results.
These results show whether the assertions pass, fail or
produce counterexamples.
The VISTA framework has error handling mechanisms in
place.
These mechanisms include timeout control, syntax valida-
tion and fallback handling for LLM outputs.
The results from the verification stage are sent back to the
user through the interface.
The VISTA framework provides an automated RTL-to-SVA
generation and validation workflow.
This workflow reduces effort and improves verification
efficiency.
After generating the assertions the VISTA framework does
some post-processing.
This post-processing includes SVA syntax linting, clock
domain inference and redundancy elimination.
The VISTA framework also integrates with SymbiYosys to
generate property files.
These property files execute -engine formal proofs, with
timeout protection.
The VISTA framework uses the LLaMA 3.1 model to
generate SystemVerilog Assertions.
The VISTA framework uses the SymbiYosys tool to perform
verification.
The VISTA framework is a pipeline that combines RTL pro-
cessing, AI-based assertion generation and formal verification.
VII. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
The evaluation of VISTA is done to see how well it works at
making assertions and if they are correct when we use formal
verification.
We used a lot of kinds of RTL modules to test VISTA,
including counters, FIFOs, simple ALUs and designs that use
FSMs.
These designs are different in terms of how complicated
they’re how big they are so we can see how well VISTA works
with different kinds of hardware behavior.
For each RTL input VISTA makes SystemVerilog Asser-
tions using the LLaMA 3.1 model that we fine-tuned.
Then we use a template and a post-processing module to
make sure the assertions VISTA made are compatible with
formal verification tools.
We use SymbiYosys to check the design that is ready, for
verification and it does model checking to see if the assertions
are valid.
We look at the following things to evaluate VISTA:
• Correctness: Measured using SymbiYosys results, indi-
cating whether assertions pass, fail, or produce counterex-
amples.
• Functional Coverage: Assesses how well the generated
assertions capture key behaviors of the RTL design.
• Redundancy: Evaluates the presence of duplicate or
trivial assertions generated by the model.
• Robustness: Measures the system’s ability to handle dif-
ferent RTL styles and incomplete inputs without failure.
We also do an analysis by comparing the assertions VISTA
made with the ones we wrote by hand to see how relevant and
useful they are.
We evaluate how VISTA works by looking at how efficiently
it can automate things how much it reduces the amount of
work we have to do by hand and how good the assertions it
makes are which shows that VISTA can be used in real-world
hardware verification workflows.
VIII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
VISTA achieved 68% fully correct assertions (123/180),
17% partially correct (syntax valid, partial coverage), and 15%
incorrect (formal proof failures). Average end-to-end latency
measured 22 seconds per module. Sequential logic constructs
exhibited strongest performance at 75% correctness, while
combinational redundancy detection presented optimization
opportunities.
Superior performance derives from domain-specific fine-
tuning capturing RTL idioms and temporal patterns absent in
general-purpose LLMs. Synopsys VCS simulation confirmed
82% proof pass rate correlation with dynamic verification,
validating formal methodology efficacy.
IX. CHALLENGES AND LIMITATIONS
VISTA is really good. It has some problems.
One big problem is that the designs can be confusing
especially when it comes to clock and reset signals.
These signals are not always clearly defined,. We have to
make some guesses when we are creating assertions and this
can affect how correct they are.
Another issue is that VISTA relies on a language model to
create assertions.
This model can make some assertions but sometimes it
makes ones that are not very good or that are repeated or that
are always true and these do not really help with verification.
The system also needs a step at the end to get the outputs
ready for verification.
If there are mistakes in this step like signals being mapped
incorrectly or templates being incomplete then the verification
results will not be right.
Also how good the assertions are depends on how good and
varied the training data’s
If the training data does not cover different complex designs
then VISTA might not work as well on new or very special
designs.
From a computer point of view running the language model
on a local machine needs a lot of power which can be a
problem for big designs or when we need to do a lot of them
at the same time.
Finally VISTA has only been tested on medium sized
designs.
We still need to figure out how to use it on big industrial
designs with many layers and that is a big challenge, for
VISTA.
X. FUTURE WORK
There are things we can do to make the VISTA framework
even better.
One important thing is to make the generated assertions
more accurate and reliable.
We can do this by using varied and complex RTL designs
to train the system.
Also using techniques that get feedback and refine the
assertions can help remove extra ones.
Another key area is to integrate counter-example analysis
from SymbiYosys.
By using failed verification cases we can make the assertions
better and more robust.
We also need to make the system work with more complex
RTL designs.
This includes modules and industrial-scale IP blocks which
would require some upgrades.
To make the system more useful we need to integrate it with
EDA tools and workflows.
Putting the system on cloud infrastructure would also help
teams work together and process designs in batches.
Lastly we can explore capabilities like turning assertions
into natural language specs.
This would help with documentation and understanding the
design better.
The VISTA framework and assertions are key, to making
all this work.
The VISTA framework and assertions will help improve
design understanding.
XI. CONCLUSION
The VISTA system is a tool that uses artificial intelligence
to make it easier to create SystemVerilog Assertions from RTL
code. This means that people do not have to spend much time
doing this work by hand when they are checking hardware.
The VISTA system uses a computer model called LLaMA
3.1 and it does a good job of creating and checking these
assertions. The system works from start to finish with the help
of SymbiYosys.
The VISTA system shows that big language models can be
used to make formal verification easier and faster. It is also
very flexible. Can be used in many different situations, which
makes it very useful for people who work with hardware.
The VISTA system is a solution because it is easy to use
and it can help people get their work done more quickly. This
is very important, for people who work with hardware and
need to get things done on time. The VISTA system is a way
to make hardware verification easier and more efficient.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Halpern et al., “AssertionBench: A Benchmark to Evaluate Large
Language Models for Assertion Generation,” arXiv:2406.18627, Jun.
2024.
[2] “Spec2Assertion: Automatic Pre-RTL Assertion Generation by LLMs,”
arXiv:2505.07995, 2025.
[3] A. D’Souza, “AssertLLM: Advancing Hardware Verification with AI,”
LinkedIn, Feb. 2025.
[4] “Fine-tuning Llama-3.1 with QLoRA,” AMD ROCm Documentation,
2025.
[5] “Enhancing Large Language Models for Hardware Verification,”
arXiv:2503.08923, Mar. 2025.
[6] SymbiYosys Documentation, symbiyosys.readthedocs.io, accessed Apr.
2026.
[7] M. Labonne, “Fine-tune Llama 3.1 Ultra-Efficiently with Unsloth,”
Hugging Face Blog, Jul. 2024.
[8] NVlabs/AssertionForge, GitHub Repository, Jun. 2025.
[9] “SystemVerilog Assertions Basics,” systemverilog.io, accessed Apr.
2026.
[10] IEEE Standards Association, “IEEE 1800-2023 SystemVerilog Stan-
dard,” 2023.
[11] PyVerilog Documentation, pyverilog.readthedocs.io, 2024.
[12] “QLoRA: Efficient Finetuning of Quantized LLMs,” arXiv:2305.14314,
May 2023.
[13] Unsloth.ai Documentation, unsloth.ai/docs, 2025.
[14] OpenCores.org RTL Modules Archive, opencores.org, accessed Apr.
2026.
[15] “Django REST Framework Documentation,” django-rest-framework.org,
2025.
[16] “React Documentation,” reactjs.org, 2025.
[17] “Ollama Local LLM Deployment,” ollama.ai, 2025.
[18] ANTLR4 Verilog Grammar Repository, GitHub, 2024.
[19] “Hardware Verification Coverage Using LLMs,” ASU FURI Project,
Nov. 2024.
[20] Synopsys VCS User Guide, Synopsys Inc., 2025.